Add blog GitHub 3 (#489)
bytebase/bytebase.com: content/blog/github-database-cicd-part-3-put-them-together.md

---
title: "How to Setup Database CI/CD with GitHub, Part 3: Put Them Together"
author: Ningjing
published_at: 2022/9/9 13:00:00
feature_image: /static/blog/github-database-cicd-part-3-put-them-together/github-howto-3.webp
tags: Education
featured: true

> description: This second part will guide you through configuring GitHub.com database GitOps with Bytebase. After following these steps, you can trigger database changes by merging sql files into your GitHub repository.

Reviewer: Needs to update this

---

This is a series of articles about Database CI/CD with GitHub

- [The Database CI/CD Best Practice with GitHub](/blog/database-cicd-best-practice-with-github)

- How to Setup Database CI/CD with GitHub Part 1-3
  - [Part 1: Enable SQL Review with GitHub Actions](/blog/github-database-cicd-part-1-sql-review-github-actions)
  - [Part 2: GitHub.com Database GitOps](/blog/github-database-cicd-part-2-github-database-gitops)
  - Part 3: Put Them Together (this one)

---

> Now that you have finished [Part One: SQL Review GitHub Actions](/blog/github-database-cicd-part-1-sql-review-github-actions) and [Part Two: GitOps workflow](/blog/github-database-cicd-part-2-github-database-gitops), this final part will guide you through putting them together to run the whole process.

Reviewer: Do we have a sample project to showcase this?

Author: We have this https://github.com/adela-bytebase/bytebase-gitops-sample, but I might need to reorganize it a little bit.

![workflow](/static/blog/github-database-cicd-part-3-put-them-together/workflow.webp)

> As you may ask, during the GitOps process, we can configure SQL review in Bytebase console (the UI version), why do we need SQL review GitHub Actions? Actually, in real-world scenarios, code review including SQL files is done by **technical leaders** for business logic accuracy, while **DBAs** review the SQL for database mechanism optimization. Both these parties need SQL review as a tool. (Of course, you can skip either of them.)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As you may ask, during the GitOps process, we can configure SQL review in Bytebase console UI version, why do we need SQL review GitHub Actions? Actually, in real-world scenarios, code review including SQL files is conducted by **technical leaders** to cover the business domain, while **DBAs** review the SQL to cover the database domain. Both parties need SQL review, they just look after different aspects.
```

> Let’s dig in and see how to do this! The detailed configuration was introduced in the previous two tutorials, refer to them first if you come across directly to this one.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let’s dig in and see how to do this! The detailed configuration is based on the previous two tutorials, check out them first if you come across directly to this one.
```

> ## Step 1 - Reorganize the Folder and Files

Reviewer: The screenshot has both prod and test. Better to mention the purpose instead of "Reorganize the Folder and Files"

Should mention "Reorganize the Folder and Files" for what?

Repeat the steps in [Part 1- Enable SQL Review GitHub Action](/blog/github-database-cicd-part-1-sql-review-github-actions) to configure the **prod** environment. You now have two GitHub Actions configure files. Pay attention to **paths**, and **file-pattern**.

![conf-prod](/static/blog/github-database-cicd-part-3-put-them-together/conf-prod.webp)

![conf-test](/static/blog/github-database-cicd-part-3-put-them-together/conf-test.webp)

## Step 2 - Create a PR, and add your SQL scripts

1. Create a new branch `testboth`.
2. Add a migration script under `bytebase/test` folder following the name convention.

> `{{ENV_NAME}}/{{DB_NAME}}__{{VERSION}}__{{TYPE}}__{{DESCRIPTION}}.sql`

Reviewer: Add the real example as well, user like to see the real one instead of just the template

![add-script](/static/blog/github-database-cicd-part-3-put-them-together/add-script.webp)

3. Commit and push this to the `testboth` branch, and create a PR in GitHub. The SQL review GitHub Actions will run automatically.
   
5. After the SQL review completes, the PR becomes mergeable.

![mergeable](/static/blog/github-database-cicd-part-3-put-them-together/mergeable.webp)

6. After you merge the PR in GitHub, there will be a new issue generated in Bytebase console.

![waiting-approval](/static/blog/github-database-cicd-part-3-put-them-together/waiting-approval.webp)

7. Approve the issue, and this SQL script will run against the **test** environment. When the issue status turns into **Done**, a file `.employeeGitHub__LATEST.sql` will be generated to record the current state of the database.
8. If everything seems OK for you for the **test** environment, you can then copy your SQL file (except the `xx__LATEST.sql`) and paste them under the **prod** folder, to trigger the schema changes on **prod** environment. Good Luck!

![last-status](/static/blog/github-database-cicd-part-3-put-them-together/last-status.webp)

> Congratulations! Now you have implemented a complete database CI/CD workflow! Customize the structure to fit your own needs!

Reviewer: This is the perfect place we can summarize and explain the entire setup as the final wrap-up.

Seize the moment.

![workflow](/static/blog/github-database-cicd-part-3-put-them-together/workflow.webp)

As you may ask, during the GitOps process, we can configure SQL review in Bytebase console UI version, why do we need SQL review GitHub Actions? Actually, in real-world scenarios, code review including SQL files is conducted by **technical leaders** to cover the business domain, while **DBAs** review the SQL to cover the database domain. Both parties need SQL review, they just look after different aspects.

Let’s dig in and see how to do this! The detailed configuration is based on the previous two tutorials, check out them first if you come across directly to this one.

Here is a demo repo:
[https://github.com/adela-bytebase/bytebase-gitops-sample](https://github.com/adela-bytebase/bytebase-gitops-sample) with an open PR
[https://github.com/adela-bytebase/bytebase-gitops-sample/pull/11](https://github.com/adela-bytebase/bytebase-gitops-sample)

## Step 1 - Add Configure file for Prod Environment

> Repeat the steps in [Part 1- Enable SQL Review GitHub Action](/blog/github-database-cicd-part-1-sql-review-github-actions) to configure the **prod** environment. You now have two GitHub Actions configure files. Pay attention to **paths**, and **file-pattern**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Repeat the steps in [Part 1- Enable SQL Review GitHub Action](/blog/github-database-cicd-part-1-sql-review-github-actions) to configure the **prod** environment. You now have two GitHub Actions config files for **test** and **prod** environments respectively. Pay attention to **paths**, and **file-pattern**.
```

4. After the SQL review completes, the PR becomes mergeable.

![mergeable](/static/blog/github-database-cicd-part-3-put-them-together/mergeable.webp)

5. After you merge the PR in GitHub, there will be a new issue generated in Bytebase console.

![waiting-approval](/static/blog/github-database-cicd-part-3-put-them-together/waiting-approval.webp)

6. Approve this issue, and the SQL script will run against the **test** environment. When the issue status turns into **Done**, a file `.employeeGitHub__LATEST.sql` will be generated to record the current state of the database.
7. If everything seems OK for you for the **test** environment, you can then copy your SQL file (except the `xx__LATEST.sql`) and paste them under the **prod** folder, to trigger the schema changes on **prod** environment. Good Luck!

![last-status](/static/blog/github-database-cicd-part-3-put-them-together/last-status.webp)

Congratulations! Now you have implemented a complete database CI/CD workflow! Let's go over the steps in the picture again:

![workflow](/static/blog/github-database-cicd-part-3-put-them-together/workflow.webp)

1. You add a SQL script on a branch, push it, and create a PR on GitHub.

> 2. The configured SQL review GitHub Actions runs automatically.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. The configured [SQL Review GitHub Action](https://github.com/marketplace/actions/sql-review) run automatically.
```

> 3. If the SQL script passed that, you can merge it into the main branch.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. If the SQL script passes that, you can merge it into the main branch.
```

4. Since your running Bytebase is configured to watch main branch, it will trigger to create an issue there.

> 5. The SQL review check will run on the issue again. After its run, you can approve it (You can skip manual approval by customization).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
5. The SQL review check will run on the issue again. After its run, you can approve it (You can change the settings to skip manual approval if needed).
```

6. The SQL script will run on your database, and the migration is done.

> 7. There will be an auto-generated file `.xxx__LATEST.sql`, which is the latest schema written back by Bytebase.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
7. There will be an auto-generated file `.xxx__LATEST.sql`, which is the latest schema written back by Bytebase after the migration.
```

> 8. After all migrations are done, now you can deploy your application code.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
8. After all migrations are done, you can now deploy your application code that is dependent on the new schema.
```
